.. vim: ft=rst sts=2 sw=2 tw=70
.. default-role:: literal

REST: What is it?
=================

There are many architectural styles building on top of HTTP,
the most popular is called REST, or REpresentational State Transfer.
REST describes the broad software architecture style which underpins
the most successful distributed system in existence, the Web.

REST From the Horse's Mouth
***************************

[Fielding]_ describes the broad software architecture style which
underpins the most successful distributed system in existence,
the world-wide web.

Constraints
+++++++++++

Client-Server
  Improves portability of the user interface.
  Improves scalability of the server components.
  Allows components to evolve independently.
Stateless
  Each request from client to server must contain all of the
  information necessary to understand the request, and cannot take
  advantage of any stored context on the server.
  ...
  This constraint induces the properties of visibility, reliability,
  and scalability.
  *Visibility* is improved because a monitoring system does not have
  to look beyond a single request datum in order to determine the full
  nature of the request.
  *Reliability* is improved because it eases the task of recovering
  from partial failures.
  *Scalability* is improved because not having to store state between
  requests allows the server component to quickly free resources, and
  further simplifies implementation because the server doesn't have to
  manage resource usage across requests.
Cache
  Cache constraints require that the data within a response to a
  request be implicitly or explicitly labeled as cacheable or
  non-cacheable.
  If a response is cacheable, then a client cache is given the right
  to reuse that response data for later, equivalent requests.
Uniform Interface
  The central feature that distinguishes the REST architectural style
  from other network-based styles is its emphasis on a uniform
  interface between components.
  By applying the software engineering principle of generality to the
  component interface, the overall system architecture is simplified
  and the visibility of interactions is improved.
  Implementations are decoupled from the services they provide, which
  encourages independent evolvability.
Layered System
  Layers can be used to encapsulate legacy services and to protect
  new services from legacy clients, simplifying components by moving
  infrequently used functionality to a shared intermediary.
  Intermediaries can also be used to improve system scalability by
  enabling load balancing of services across multiple networks and
  processors.
Code-On-Demand (optional)
  REST allows client functionality to be extended by downloading and
  executing code in the form of applets or scripts.
  This simplifies clients by reducing the number of features required
  to be pre-implemented.
  Allowing features to be downloaded after deployment improves system
  extensibility.
  However, it also reduces visibility, and thus is only an optional
  constraint within REST.

Architectural Elements
++++++++++++++++++++++

  REST style is an abstraction of the architectural elements within
  a distributed hypermedia system.
  REST ignores the details of component implementation and protocol
  syntax in order to focus on the roles of components, the constraints
  upon their interaction with other components, and their
  interpretation of significant data elements.
  It encompasses the fundamental constraints upon components,
  connectors, and data that define the basis of the Web architecture,
  and thus the essence of its behavior as a network-based application.

  The key abstraction of information in REST is a resource.
  Any information that can be named can be a resource: a document or
  image, a temporal service (e.g. "today's weather in Los Angeles"), a
  collection of other resources, a non-virtual object (e.g. a person),
  and so on.
  In other words, any concept that might be the target of an author's
  hypertext reference must fit within the definition of a resource.
  A resource is a conceptual mapping to a set of entities, not the
  entity that corresponds to the mapping at any particular point in
  time.

  This abstract definition of a resource enables key features of the
  Web architecture.
  First, it provides generality by encompassing many sources of
  information without artificially distinguishing them by type or
  implementation.
  Second, it allows late binding of the reference to a representation,
  enabling content negotiation to take place based on characteristics
  of the request.
  Finally, it allows an author to reference the concept rather than
  some singular representation of that concept, thus removing the need
  to change all existing links whenever the representation changes
  (assuming the author used the right identifier).

REST APIs must be hypertext-driven
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

http://roy.gbiv.com/untangled/2008/rest-apis-must-be-hypertext-driven

* A REST API should not be dependent on any single communication
  protocol, though its successful mapping to a given protocol may be
  dependent on the availability of metadata, choice of methods, etc.
  In general, any protocol element that uses a URI for identification
  must allow any URI scheme to be used for the sake of that
  identification.
  [Failure here implies that identification is not separated from
  interaction.]
* A REST API should not contain any changes to the communication
  protocols aside from filling-out or fixing the details of
  underspecified bits of standard protocols, such as HTTP’s PATCH
  method or Link header field.
  Workarounds for broken implementations (such as those browsers
  stupid enough to believe that HTML defines HTTP’s method set) should
  be defined separately, or at least in appendices, with an
  expectation that the workaround will eventually be obsolete.
  [Failure here implies that the resource interfaces are
  object-specific, not generic.]
* A REST API should spend almost all of its descriptive effort in
  defining the media type(s) used for representing resources and
  driving application state, or in defining extended relation names
  and/or hypertext-enabled mark-up for existing standard media types.
  Any effort spent describing what methods to use on what URIs of
  interest should be entirely defined within the scope of the
  processing rules for a media type (and, in most cases, already
  defined by existing media types).
  [Failure here implies that out-of-band information is driving
  interaction instead of hypertext.]
* A REST API must not define fixed resource names or hierarchies (an
  obvious coupling of client and server).
  Servers must have the freedom to control their own namespace.
  Instead, allow servers to instruct clients on how to construct
  appropriate URIs, such as is done in HTML forms and URI templates,
  by defining those instructions within media types and link
  relations.
  [Failure here implies that clients are assuming a resource structure
  due to out-of band information, such as a domain-specific standard,
  which is the data-oriented equivalent to RPC's functional coupling].
* A REST API should never have “typed” resources that are significant
  to the client.
  Specification authors may use resource types for describing server
  implementation behind the interface, but those types must be
  irrelevant and invisible to the client.
  The only types that are significant to a client are the current
  representation’s media type and standardized relation names.
  [ditto]
* A REST API should be entered with no prior knowledge beyond the
  initial URI (bookmark) and set of standardized media types that are
  appropriate for the intended audience (i.e., expected to be
  understood by any client that might use the API).
  From that point on, all application state transitions must be driven
  by client selection of server-provided choices that are present in
  the received representations or implied by the user’s manipulation
  of those representations.
  The transitions may be determined (or limited by) the client’s
  knowledge of media types and resource communication mechanisms, both
  of which may be improved on-the-fly (e.g., code-on-demand).
  [Failure here implies that out-of-band information is driving
  interaction instead of hypertext.]


REST over HTTP, Layman's Summary
********************************

It all boils down to a simple mantra:

  **Do not break existing stuff.**

Where a REST interface implementation uses preexisting technologies,
it must respect those technologies' semantics.  Otherwise, all kinds
of bad stuff will happen.

REST interfaces over HTTP must stick to the HTTP method semantics.
Intermediate caches have no knowledge of the request and response
semantics beyond what is conferred in the requests and responses
themselves.
Deviance from semantics prescribed for HTTP methods could lead to
improper caching and/or wrongly resubmitted requests.

**Do not rely on out-of-band information.**
Ideally, a REST interface is fully usable with the only preconcieved
information being an initial entry point and how to handle certain
media types.

  **Use URIs to communicate related entry points.**
  Instead of letting clients ferret out identifiers of related
  entities from responses and construct URIs from these in an ad-hoc
  fashion (vice versa for request entities arriving at servers), the
  communication should use URIs from the get-go.

  **Use media types to describe transferred entities.**
  HTTP headers are in-band.

A good article describing REST is at [infoq.com]_.

.. [Fielding] http://www.ics.uci.edu/~fielding/pubs/dissertation/top.htm
.. [infoq.com] http://www.infoq.com/articles/roa-rest-of-rest

